.TH ATOPACCTD 8 "January 2024" "Linux"
.SH NAME
.B atopacctd
- process accounting daemon
.SH SYNOPSIS
.P
.B atopacctd
[-v | topdirectory]
.P
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.I atopacctd
daemon switches on the process accounting feature in the kernel
and let the process accounting records be written to a file,
called the source file from now.
After process accounting is activated, the
.I atopacctd
daemon transfers every process accounting record that is available
in the source file to a shadow file.
Client processes (like
.I atop
processes) will read the shadow files instead of the
process accounting source file.
.br
In this way, the
.I atopacctd
daemon operates as a 'layer' between the process accounting file
that is written by the kernel and the shadow accounting files that are read by
.I atop
processes.
.PP
This approach has the following advantages:
.PP
.TP 3
.B o
The
.I atopacctd
daemon takes care that the source file is kept to a limited size.
As soon as its maximum size is reached, it is truncated to a size
of zero again (this is not noticed by the
.I atop
processes).
.PP
.TP 3
.B o
The
.I atopacct
daemon takes care that a shadow file is kept to a limited size.
As soon as the current shadow file reaches this maximum size, the
.I atopacctd
daemon creates a new (subsequent) shadow file.
While client processes still have the possibility to read the previous
shadow file(s), the
.I atopacctd
daemon continues writing accounting records to the newest (current)
shadow file.
For this reason, the name of a shadow file consists of a 10-digit
sequence number followed by the extension '.paf' (process acounting file).
Old shadow files that are not used by client processes any more, are
automatically removed by the garbage collector in the
.I atopacctd
daemon.
.PP
.TP 3
.B o
When no client processes are active (any more), all shadow files
will be deleted and no records will be transferred to a shadow file
any more. As soon as at least one client is activate again, the
.I atopacctd
daemon continues writing shadow files.
.PP
The directory
.B /var/run
is used as the default topdirectory.
Below this top-directory, the source file
.B pacct_source
is created to which the kernel writes the process accounting records.
.br
Furthermore, the subdirectory
.B pacct_shadow.d
is created as a 'container' for the shadow files.
Apart from the shadow files, also the file
.B current
is maintained in this subdirectory, containing the sequence number of the
current (newest) shadow file and the maximum number of records that will be
written in each shadow file.
.PP
An alternative topdirectory can be specified as command line argument.
When an alternative topdirectory is defined, also modify the
configuration file
.B /etc/atoprc
to inform
.I atop
clients about this alternative location (see the 
.B atoprc
man page).
Such alternative topdirectory should be owned by root and may not be
writable for the group or others (security reasons).
.PP
Notice that the kernel suspends writing process accounting records
when the free space of the filesystem on which the process accounting file
resides drops below 2%. Writing is resumed when the free space is 4% or more.
These lowwater and highwater percentages can be configured via the
.B /proc/sys/kernel/acct
pseudo-file.
.br
The
.I atopacctd
daemon suspends transferring process accounting records to shadow files
when the free space of the filesystem on which the process accounting file
resides drops below 5%. Transfer is resumed when the free space is 5% or more.
Log messages are generated via syslog when writing to the current shadow
file is suspended or resumed.
.PP
The
.B -v
flag can be used to verify the version of the
.I atopacctd
daemon.
.PP
.SH FILES
.PP
.TP 5
.B /var/run/pacct_source
Regular file to which the kernel writes the process accounting records.
This file will be regularly truncated.
.PP
.TP 5
.B /var/run/pacct_shadow.d/current
Regular file containing the sequence number of the current shadow file
and the maximum number of records per shadow file.
.PP
.TP 5
.B /var/run/pacct_shadow.d/N.paf
Regular files containing the process accounting records that have
been copied transparently from the source file (N represents a 10-digit
sequence number).
.SH SEE ALSO
.B atop(1),
.B atopsar(1),
.B atoprc(5),
.B netatop(4),
.B netatopd(8)
.br
.B https://www.atoptool.nl
.SH AUTHOR
Gerlof Langeveld (gerlof.langeveld@atoptool.nl)
